# 04. Data Abstractions

## Basics

Types in Elixir are implemented with pure, stateless modules

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

Different of OO that you call a method of a class (with state), Elixir provides Modules that is just a functions wrapper and all state that you need, you must pass through parameters

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

* A module is in charge of abstracting some data.
* The module's functions usually expect an instance of the data abstraction as the first argument.
* Modifier functions return a modified version of the abstraction.
* Query functions return some other type of data.

## Structs

In Elixir you can define an _named map_ with _structs_, as follows:

```elixir
defmodule Fraction do
  defstruct a: nil, b: nil
end
```

keyword + initial values

<!-- livebook:{"break_markdown":true} -->

The name of the struct is the module's name

```elixir
one_half = %Fraction{a: 1, b: 2}
```

Is possible access individual fields with anyother map

```elixir
one_half.a
```

Pattern matches works as well

```elixir
%Fraction{a: a, b: b} = one_half
b
```

Update a map it's similar to update a list

```elixir
one_quarter = %Fraction{one_half | b: 4}
```

Although structs it's like map, you can't do everything with structs that you do with maps. For instance, you can't use `Enum` module to a struct

```elixir
Enum.to_list(one_half)
```

But, you can still use `Map` module into a struct

```elixir
Map.to_list(one_half)
```

The `struct` field has an important consequence for pattern matching. A struct pattern can’t match a plain map:

```elixir
%Fraction{} = %{a: 1, b: 2}
```

But, a plain map pattern can match a struct

```elixir
%{a: a, b: b} = %Fraction{a: 2, b: 3}
b
```

This is due to the way pattern matching works with maps. Remember, all fields from the pattern must exist in the matched term. When matching a map to a struct pattern, this isn't the case, because `%Fraction{}` contains the field `struct`, which isn't present in the map being matched.     
The opposite works, because you match a struct to the `%{a: a, b: b}` pattern. Because all these fields exist in the `Fraction` struct, the match is successful.

```elixir
IO.puts(inspect(MapSet.new(), structs: false))
```

## Protocols

A _protocol_ is a module in which you declare functions without implement them. Consider it a rough equivalent of an OO interface. 
To declare:

```elixir
defprotocol String.Chars do
  def to_string(thing)
end
```

To implement you start the implementation by calling the `defimpl` macro. Then you specify which protocol to implement and the corresponding data type. Finally, the `do/end` block contains the implementation of each protocol function.

```elixir
defimpl String.Chars, for: Integer do
  def to_string(term) do
    Integer.to_string(term)
  end
end
```

https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Kernel.html#defprotocol/2
